index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: ASPAX
description: The simplest Node.js asset packager
---
What if you could watch, compile, concatenate, minify and fingerprint all your web assets using just a simple file written in clear, human-readable YML syntax?

{% highlight yaml %}

js/app.js|fp|min:
  - lib/bootstrap/js/bootstrap.js
  - lib/moment.js
  - lib/jade/runtime.js
  - scripts/namespaces.coffee|bare
  - templates/item.jade
  - scripts/index.ls|bare

css/app.css|fp|min:
  - lib/bootstrap/css/bootstrap.css
  - lib/bootstrap/css/bootstrap-theme.css
  - styles/index.styl|nib

favicon.png:             images/favicon.png

fonts/bs-glyphs.eot|fp:  lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.eot
fonts/bs-glyphs.svg|fp:  lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.svg
fonts/bs-glyphs.ttf|fp:  lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.ttf
fonts/bs-glyphs.woff|fp: lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.woff

{% endhighlight %}

That's it. No complicated `.initConfig()`, no redundant code to describe tasks in JavaScript or CoffeeScript, just a simple YML file in your assets folder.

By looking at that file, ASPAX will:

- watch the folder and rebuild **just the necessary files** on changes;
- compile, concatenate and copy files in development mode;
- compile, concatenate, **minify**, **fingerprint** and copy files in production mode.

***
Warning - ASPAX is still under heavy development, so expect breaking changes during January 2014!

## Installation
Most likely you'll want ASPAX installed as a global module:

{% highlight sh %}

npm install aspax -g

{% endhighlight %}

## Plugins
To keep the global CLI module lightweight and dependency-free, ASPAX is using a plugin system to handle different source types such as CoffeeScript, LiveScript, client-side Jade templates, Stylus or LESS files, etc.

ASPAX will look for plugins in `./node_modules` folder, so you'll have to install the necessary source handlers like this:

{% highlight sh %}

npm install aspax-coffee-handler

{% endhighlight %}

If you're running ASPAX in a Node.js application root folder, consider using the `--save-dev` option to avoid deploying the plugins to your production environment:

{% highlight sh %}

npm install aspax-coffee-handler --save-dev

{% endhighlight %}

### Available plugins
So far, the available plugins are:

- [aspax-coffee-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-coffee-handler) for [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org);
- [aspax-iced-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-iced-handler) for [IcedCoffeeScript](http://maxtaco.github.io/coffee-script);
- [aspax-ls-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-ls-handler) for [LiveScript](http://livescript.net);
- [aspax-jade-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-jade-handler) for client-side [Jade](http://jade-lang.com) templates;
- [aspax-styl-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-styl-handler) for [Stylus](http://learnboost.github.io/stylus);
- [aspax-less-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-less-handler) for [LESS](http://lesscss.org).

If you need something else, please let me know and maybe I can do it, or better yet, feel free to do it yourself and notify me so I can list it here.

### Developing additional plugins
Each plugin npm should be named `aspax-xyz-handler`, where `xyz` is the file extension it refers to.

Each plugin npm should export a `compile()` method with this signature (see example [here](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-coffee-handler/blob/master/plugin.coffee)):

{% highlight js %}

exports.compile = function(file, flags, callback) {
  ...
};

{% endhighlight %}

...and optionally a `findImports()` method to recursively find imported/referred files (see examples [here](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-less-handler/blob/master/plugin.iced) and [here](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-jade-handler/blob/master/plugin.iced)):

{% highlight js %}

exports.findImports = function(imports, file, callback) {
  ...
};

{% endhighlight %}

## Usage
The two main options are:
- `-s, --src <source>`: Assets source folder;
- `-d, --dst <destination>`: Assets destination folder - defaults to `public` in current folder.

You can type `aspax --help` in the console for advanced usage, but here are just a few CLI usage examples:

{% highlight sh %}

# watch and build on-the-fly during development
aspax -s ../assets watch

# build for development
aspax -s ../assets build

# pack for production (will compile, concat, minify and fingerprint)
aspax -s ../assets pack

# clean everything
aspax -s ../client clean

{% endhighlight %}

### Using assets built and packaged by ASPAX in an Express.js application
See [this tutorial](/tutorial) for a nice step-by-step guide on how to use ASPAX with Express.js.

## Config file syntax
The syntax of `aspax.yml` should be quite simple and human-friendly. Here are just a few tips:

### Marking assets for fingerprinting and minification
Just add the appropriate **flags** after the asset file name (the order is irrelevant):

{% highlight text %}

          o-- fingerprint
          |  o---- minify
          |  |
          |  |
          V  V
          -- ---
js/app.js|fp|min:
  - ...

{% endhighlight %}

The **flags** will have no effect in development mode, but in production:

- marking an asset for fingerprinting will add a UNIX timestamp like `-1387239833024` before its extension;
- marking an asset for minification will process it with [UglifyJS2](https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS2)/[CSS-optimizer](https://github.com/css/csso) and will also add `.min` before the extension.

Note: fingerprinting will work for anything, while minification only makes sense for JS and CSS files.

### Plugin flags
Some source-handling plugins are also accepting **flags** (i.e. `bare` for CoffeeScript files). Use the same syntax:

{% highlight text %}

   o---------------------o
   | compile without the |
   | top-level function  |--o
   | safety wrapper      |  |
   o---------------------o  |
                            V
  - ...                   ----
  - scripts/source.coffee|bare
  - ...

{% endhighlight %}

## FAQ

### What's the meaning of the name?
**AS**set **PA**ckager, and **X** because ASPAX is an evolution of [ASPA](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspa), a similar module I've built in the past.

### So why writing ASPAX instead of just updating ASPA?
ASPAX brings in some breaking changes by simplifying the YML file syntax and introducing a plugin system to handle various source files. Simply updating ASPA wouldn't have been possible without annoying the happiness of too many users.

Commit message:

Let's add a mention about being unstable for a couple of weeks

index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: ASPAX
description: The simplest Node.js asset packager
---
What if you could watch, compile, concatenate, minify and fingerprint all your web assets using just a simple file written in clear, human-readable YML syntax?

{% highlight yaml %}

js/app.js|fp|min:
  - lib/bootstrap/js/bootstrap.js
  - lib/moment.js
  - lib/jade/runtime.js
  - scripts/namespaces.coffee|bare
  - templates/item.jade
  - scripts/index.ls|bare

css/app.css|fp|min:
  - lib/bootstrap/css/bootstrap.css
  - lib/bootstrap/css/bootstrap-theme.css
  - styles/index.styl|nib

favicon.png:             images/favicon.png

fonts/bs-glyphs.eot|fp:  lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.eot
fonts/bs-glyphs.svg|fp:  lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.svg
fonts/bs-glyphs.ttf|fp:  lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.ttf
fonts/bs-glyphs.woff|fp: lib/bootstrap/fonts/glyphicons-halflings-regular.woff

{% endhighlight %}

That's it. No complicated `.initConfig()`, no redundant code to describe tasks in JavaScript or CoffeeScript, just a simple YML file in your assets folder.

By looking at that file, ASPAX will:

- watch the folder and rebuild **just the necessary files** on changes;
- compile, concatenate and copy files in development mode;
- compile, concatenate, **minify**, **fingerprint** and copy files in production mode.

## Warning: ASPAX is still under heavy development

...so the whole thing might be a bit unstable during January 2014!...

Also, if you have a suggestion or an idea about a useful ASPAX plugin (and for some reason can't [do it yourself](#developing_additional_plugins)), don't hesitate to [create an issue](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax/issues). Can't promise every suggestion / desired feature will be implemented, but I'm willing to consider all of them :-).

## Installation
Most likely you'll want ASPAX installed as a global module:

{% highlight sh %}

npm install aspax -g

{% endhighlight %}

## Plugins
To keep the global CLI module lightweight and dependency-free, ASPAX is using a plugin system to handle different source types such as CoffeeScript, LiveScript, client-side Jade templates, Stylus or LESS files, etc.

ASPAX will look for plugins in `./node_modules` folder, so you'll have to install the necessary source handlers like this:

{% highlight sh %}

npm install aspax-coffee-handler

{% endhighlight %}

If you're running ASPAX in a Node.js application root folder, consider using the `--save-dev` option to avoid deploying the plugins to your production environment:

{% highlight sh %}

npm install aspax-coffee-handler --save-dev

{% endhighlight %}

### Available plugins
So far, the available plugins are:

- [aspax-coffee-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-coffee-handler) for [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org);
- [aspax-iced-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-iced-handler) for [IcedCoffeeScript](http://maxtaco.github.io/coffee-script);
- [aspax-ls-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-ls-handler) for [LiveScript](http://livescript.net);
- [aspax-jade-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-jade-handler) for client-side [Jade](http://jade-lang.com) templates;
- [aspax-styl-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-styl-handler) for [Stylus](http://learnboost.github.io/stylus);
- [aspax-less-handler](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-less-handler) for [LESS](http://lesscss.org).

If you need something else, please let me know and maybe I can do it, or better yet, feel free to do it yourself and notify me so I can list it here.

### Developing additional plugins
Each plugin npm should be named `aspax-xyz-handler`, where `xyz` is the file extension it refers to.

Each plugin npm should export a `compile()` method with this signature (see example [here](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-coffee-handler/blob/master/plugin.coffee)):

{% highlight js %}

exports.compile = function(file, flags, callback) {
  ...
};

{% endhighlight %}

...and optionally a `findImports()` method to recursively find imported/referred files (see examples [here](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-less-handler/blob/master/plugin.iced) and [here](https://github.com/icflorescu/aspax-jade-handler/blob/master/plugin.iced)):

{% highlight js %}

exports.findImports = function(imports, file, callback) {
  ...
};

{% endhighlight %}

## Usage
The two main options are:
- `-s, --src <source>`: Assets source folder;
- `-d, --dst <destination>`: Assets destination folder - defaults to `public` in current folder.

You can type `aspax --help` in the console for advanced usage, but here are just a few CLI usage examples:

{% highlight sh %}

# watch and build on-the-fly during development
aspax -s ../assets watch

# build for development
aspax -s ../assets build

# pack for production (will compile, concat, minify and fingerprint)
aspax -s ../assets pack

# clean everything
aspax -s ../client clean

{% endhighlight %}

### Using assets built and packaged by ASPAX in an Express.js application
See [this tutorial](/tutorial) for a nice step-by-step guide on how to use ASPAX with Express.js.

## Config file syntax
The syntax of `aspax.yml` should be quite simple and human-friendly. Here are just a few tips:

### Marking assets for fingerprinting and minification
Just add the appropriate **flags** after the asset file name (the order is irrelevant):

{% highlight text %}

          o-- fingerprint
          |  o---- minify
          |  |
          |  |
          V  V
          -- ---
js/app.js|fp|min:
  - ...

{% endhighlight %}

The **flags** will have no effect in development mode, but in production:

- marking an asset for fingerprinting will add a UNIX timestamp like `-1387239833024` before its extension;
- marking an asset for minification will process it with [UglifyJS2](https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS2)/[CSS-optimizer](https://github.com/css/csso) and will also add `.min` before the extension.

Note: fingerprinting will work for anything, while minification only makes sense for JS and CSS files.

### Plugin flags
Some source-handling plugins are also accepting **flags** (i.e. `bare` for CoffeeScript files). Use the same syntax:

{% highlight text %}

   o---------------------o
   | compile without the |
   | top-level function  |--o
   | safety wrapper      |  |
   o---------------------o  |
                            V
  - ...                   ----
  - scripts/source.coffee|bare
  - ...

{% endhighlight %}

## FAQ

### What's the meaning of the name?
**AS**set **PA**ckager, and **X** because ASPAX is an evolution of [ASPA](http://github.com/icflorescu/aspa), a similar module I've built in the past.

### So why writing ASPAX instead of just updating ASPA?
ASPAX brings in some breaking changes by simplifying the YML file syntax and introducing a plugin system to handle various source files. Simply updating ASPA wouldn't have been possible without annoying the happiness of too many users.
